== Planned features
* <tt>solve</tt> without a block returns an enumerator
* warning for singleton variables
* <tt>nonvar</tt> predicate

== Version 2.1 
* New features
  * Works with Ruby 1.9.3 and 2.0 (only <tt>module X; extend Rubylog::Context</tt> syntax)

== Version 2.0.1
* Bug fixes
  * <tt>"a/b".file\_in("a")</tt> only succeeds once

== Version 2.0.0
* Backwards incompatibilities
  * <tt>Rubylog.theory</tt> renamed to <tt>Kernel#rubylog</tt>.
  * <tt>file\_in</tt> includes directories and yields relative paths.
    <tt>dir\_in</tt> also yields relative paths.
  * <tt>trace</tt> has became <tt>Rubylog.trace</tt>.
  * <tt>Theory</tt> has changed to <tt>Context</tt> and it became a module. 
  * No more inclusion of theories (contexts).
  * Predicates do not have reference in the theory (context), they are only referenced from the
    subject class in closures of the functor methods.
  * Unification uses <tt>eql?</tt> instead of <tt>==</tt>. This means
    <tt>5.0.is\_not(5)</tt>
  * <tt>Theory#eval</tt> removed. Use <tt>Context#instance\_eval</tt>.
  * Removed <tt>functor</tt>, use <tt>predicate</tt> and <tt>predicate\_for</tt>
    instead. The latter ones have a different syntax for indicating predicates, eg.
    <tt>".and() .false :true"</tt> or <tt>"L.splits\_to(H,T)"</tt>
  * <tt>Structure</tt> is bound to the predicate it represents. The first argument of <tt>Structure.new</tt> is the predicate. <tt>S.structure(Predicate,Functor,Args)</tt> now has 4 arguments.
  * <tt>current\_theory</tt> is removed.
  * No more real prefix functors, n-ary prefix functors are n\+1-ary functors with the context object as the first argument. Use <tt>predicate\_for Rubylog::Context, "..."</tt>.
  * <tt>Rubylog::DefaultBuiltins</tt> is replaced by <tt>Rubylog</tt>
  * <tt>Theory#prove</tt> was removed. Use <tt>Context#true?</tt>
  * <tt>Rubylog::Callable<tt> renamed to <tt>Rubylog::Goal</tt>
  * <tt>discontiguous</tt> is removed. No more discontiguity checks.
  * <tt>implicit</tt> is removed. No implicit mode anymore.
  * <tt>Theory#clear</tt> is replaced by <tt>Context#initialize\_context</tt>.
    However, currently it only clears <tt>default\_subject</tt>.
  * <tt>CompositeTerm</tt> is renamed to <tt>CompoundTerm</tt>.
  * <tt>rublog\_compile\_variables</tt> is renamed to
     <tt>rubylog\_match\_variables</tt>, <tt>variable\_hashes</tt> is removed.
  * <tt>rubylog\_variables\_hash</tt> removed
* Features 
  * Rspec integration
  * +include+ or +extend+ <tt>Rubylog::Context</tt> into any class or object
  * thats\_not
  * Comments in indicators
  * New tracer
  * added <tt>every</tt>
  * all builtins are available by default
* Bug fixes


== Version 1.0.0
== Version 0.0.1
== Version 0.0.0
